# Identifiers in Research 

In research, referencing research objects such as datasets, organisms, publications, software or chemicals is very important. We want to make sure that everyone participating in research activities (such as via publications, datasets, or collaborations) are all in agreement about what specific research object is being referenced.  

For example, to make sure we correctly identify a reference publication we include bibliographic information in the citation so that everyone knows exactly which publication is being referred to. Unique references are so important we have created international committees to standardize naming. For example, organisms are given unique and globally specific identifying names (e.g. *Eschereicia coli*, *Gallus gallus* etc.) and chemicals having a formal name derived from explicit naming rules (e.g. IUPAC nomenclature). 

# Persistent Identifiers or PIDs 

With digitization, scientists have continued to use unique and global identifiers to correctly and persistently identify research objects. We call these kinds of digital identifiers PIDs (persistent identifiers). 

Common PIDs in research include DOIs (digital object identifiers) and ORCiDs ([PID yourself and get an ORCiD!](https://orcid.org/register)). At the University of Guelph, you can deposit datasets and other research objects (including schemas and OCA bundles generated by the Semantic Engine) in the [Agri-Environmental Research Data Repository](https://borealisdata.ca/dataverse/ugardr). When you deposit your data or other research object in this repository your submission is given a DOI; a unique PID that you can use when referencing your data or other research object. 

# Self-Addressing Identifiers 

Another type of identifier is [Self-Addressing Identifiers](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ssmith-said-02.html) (SAIDs) which take advantage of hashing to create an identifier that is calculated directly from the content of the thing being identified. You can think of hashes as unique fingerprints derived directly from any type of digital object. 

When you create a hash value, you take a digital object, plug it into a one-way formula, and generate another value – the hash value. A hash function always gives the same hash value for the same content and if you change the digital object in any small way, even a single character or space, the resulting hash value will be completely different.  

One important characteristic about hash functions is that they do not work in reverse. If you are given a hash value, you cannot determine what the original content was. This means that if your digital object contains sensitive information, you cannot recreate that data from the hash value. 

For the OCA schema, all parts of the schema and the schema bundle itself are given SAIDs. Each file of the schema bundle is hashed and then the hash value (the SAID) becomes the filename. You can discover the hash value by looking at each JSON filename of the OCA schema, by looking at the meta.json file inside a schema bundle, or you can calculate it directly using the SAID hashing function. 

# Benefits of using SAIDs for Research Objects 

Self-Addressing Identifiers are very useful for tracking digital resources and they can be considered digital fingerprints. If you find two schemas in two different locations (perhaps one is a published standard and the other is published with a dataset), you can compare the SAIDs of each schema (i.e. digital fingerprints) and if the schema SAIDs are the same, then the schemas are identical. 

Alternatively, if you only have a SAID reference for a schema, you can find the corresponding schema (or schema part) by looking for the identical SAID of other schemas. If the SAIDs are the same, then the documents are also identical.  

You can confirm that the SAID is legitimate by performing your own SAID hashing of the schema. By comparing the freshly generated SAID to the claimed SAID you can check if the document or SAID has been altered. Agri-food Data Canada is currently developing a SAID verifier where you can upload an OCA schema and confirm the SAID of the schema.
